abstract
Few-shot learning is a challenging task that
requires language models to generalize from
limited examples. Large language models
like GPT-3 and PaLM have made impressive
progress in this area, but they still face diffi￾culties in reasoning tasks such as GSM8K, a
benchmark for arithmetic problems. To im￾prove their reasoning skills, previous work has
proposed to guide the language model with
prompts that elicit a series of reasoning steps
before giving the final answer, achieving a sig￾nificant improvement on GSM8K from 17.9%
to 58.1% in problem-solving rate. In this pa￾per, we present DIVERSE (Diverse Verifier on
Reasoning Step), a novel approach that further
enhances the reasoning capability of language
models. DIVERSE has three main components:
first, it generates diverse prompts to explore dif￾ferent reasoning paths for the same question;
second, it uses a verifier to filter out incorrect
answers based on a weighted voting scheme;
and third, it verifies each reasoning step indi￾vidually instead of the whole chain. We eval￾uate DIVERSE on the latest language model
code-davinci-002 and show that it achieves new
state-of-the-art results on six of eight reasoning
benchmarks (e.g., GSM8K 74.4% → 83.2%).
1 Introduction
Large pretrained language models (PLMs) have
shown remarkable performance on various natural
language processing tasks, either by few-shot learn￾ing with prompts (Radford et al., 2019; Le Scao
and Rush, 2021; Jin et al., 2022) or by fine-tuning
(Houlsby et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2021; He et al.,
2022). However, despite the increasing size and
capacity of PLMs such as GPT-3 with 175B param￾eters (Brown et al., 2020) and PaLM with 540B
parameters (Chowdhery et al., 2022), their reason￾ing abilities are still limited and often require mul-
∗Work was done during an internship at Microsoft Re￾search Asia.
Figure 1: Our proposed method, DIVERSE (Diverse
Verifier on Reasoning Step).
tiple steps to produce correct answers, especially
for tasks involving arithmetic, commonsense, or
inductive reasoning (Cobbe et al., 2021).
Recent works (Wei et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022;
Kojima et al., 2022; Lampinen et al., 2022) have
demonstrated that PLMs possess some latent rea￾soning capabilities, but they need carefully de￾signed prompts to activate them. For instance, Wei
et al. (2022) proposed chain-of-thought reasoning,
which inserts multi-step reasoning paths before gen￾erating the final answers, and achieved significant
improvement on the GSM8K arithmetic benchmark
(Cobbe et al., 2021). Wang et al. (2022c) further
introduced a voting mechanism to select the most
consistent answer among different reasoning paths,
and achieved state-of-the-art results on several rea￾soning benchmarks using the PaLM model (Chowd￾hery et al., 2022). Building on these successes, this
paper continues this line of research and advances
the reasoning capabilities of PLMs in three aspects,
as illustrated in Figure 1.
First, we propose to increase the diversity of rea￾soning paths by not only sampling from a single
prompt, but also varying the prompt itself. We hy￾pothesize that different prompts can elicit different
ways of thinking, while the correct answer should
be robust to these variations. Second, we propose
to use a verifier to score the quality of each rea￾soning path and guide the voting mechanism. We
argue that not all reasoning paths are equally good
arXiv:2206.02336v3 [cs.CL] 24 May 2023
Chain-Of-Thought Reasoning for GSM8K Math Word Problem
Q: If there are 3 cars in the parking lot and 2 more
cars arrive, how many cars are in the parking lot?
A: There are 3 cars in the parking lot already. 2 more
arrive. Now there are 3 + 2 = 5 cars. The answer is 5.
...
Q: Janet’s ducks lay 16 eggs per day. She eats three
for breakfast every morning and bakes muffins for her
friends every day with four. She sells the remainder
for $2 per egg. How much does she make every day?
A: She has 16 - 3 - 4 = 9 eggs left. So she makes
2 ∗ 9 =18 per day. The answer is 18.
Figure 2: Chain-of-thought reasoning for GSM8K math
word problem. The prompt is colored black and the rea￾soning path produced by the language model is colored
teal. This reasoning path contains two reasoning steps.
or reliable, and some may contain errors or incon￾sistencies that can be detected by the verifier. Third,
we propose to assign a fine-grained label to each
step of the reasoning path and use a step-aware
verifier to attribute the correctness or wrongness of
the final answer to each step. We conjecture that
some steps may be correct but followed by wrong
steps or vice versa, and identifying these cases can
help diagnose and improve the reasoning process.
We name our method as DIVERSE (diverse ver￾ifier on reasoning step) and evaluate it on eight
reasoning benchmarks that require different types
of reasoning skills. We use three OpenAI PLMs
(davinci, text-davinci-002, and code-davinci-002)
and compare our results with recent state-of-the-art
methods. We find that DIVERSE can consistently
and significantly improve the performance of PLMs
on these tasks, and achieve new state-of-the-art re￾sults on six of them1
: GSM8K (74.4% → 83.2%),
AsDiv (81.9% → 88.7%), MultiArith (99.3% →
99.8%), SVAMP(86.6% → 87.0%), SingleEq
(79.5% → 94.9%), and CLUTRR (67.0% →
95.9%).
Our data is publicly available at https://github.
com/microsoft/DiVeRSe.
2 Diverse Verifier on Reasoning Step
Figure 1 shows the overview of DIVERSE. The
key insights are three-fold: (1) leveraging diverse
prompts to induce more diverse reasoning paths
from the language models (Section 2.1); (2) train-
1Most of the previous SOTA results were achieved by self￾consistency on PaLM-540B(Chowdhery et al., 2022).
ing a voting verifier to better derive the final an￾swers from multiple reasoning paths (Section 2.2);
(3) leveraging step correctness to further boost the
voting verifier (Section 2.3).
2.1 Diverse Prompts
To reason effectively, it is beneficial to explore
diverse reasoning paths, following the idea that
“All Roads lead to Rome”. Wang et al. (2022c)
proposed to generate various reasoning paths from
language models by sampling decoding. However,
their method relies on a fixed set of exemplars for
all prompts, which may introduce bias and limit
the diversity of the generated reasoning paths. To
address this issue, we randomly select M1 different
prompts for each question, and then sample M2
reasoning paths for each prompt using sampling
decoding. This way, we obtain M = M1 × M2
diverse reasoning paths for each question.2
2.2 Voting Verifier
Verifier. The verifier takes a question and a candi￾date reasoning path as input, and outputs the prob￾ability that the reasoning path leads to the correct
answer. We use deberta-v3-large (He et al., 2021)
as the backbone model, with a small scalar head
that outputs predictions on the [CLS] token.
Training the verifier. For each training question,
we generate multiple candidate reasoning paths
using chain-of-thought reasoning. We regard the
reasoning paths that match the ground truth final
answer as positive, and the others as negative.
Voting Verifier. Wang et al. (2022c) use major￾ity voting to aggregate the predictions of different
reasoning paths. This method may fail when the
majority of the reasoning paths are misled, while
the minority of the reasoning paths are reasonable.
We propose voting verifier, which leverages both
voting and verifier:
ˆy = arg max
y
M
X
i=1
✶yi=y · f(xi
, zi
, yi), (1)
where ✶yi=y is an indicator function that returns 1
(or 0) if yi = y (or not), and f(·) is the probability
produced by the verifier.
2.3 Step-aware Voting Verifier
Each reasoning path consists of several steps. We
hypothesize that not all the steps in an incorrect
2Our main experiments use M1 = 5 and M2 = 20.
Figure 3: How step-level labels are extracted. This
figure shows four reasoning paths for a math word problem: the first two are positive and the bottom two are
negative. The path 7 → 9 → 18 means that the first step
calculates 7, the second step calculates 9, and the third
step calculates the final answer 18. For the last path, the
third step (which calculates 8) has never occurred in any
positive reasoning paths, thus we regard this step and
all steps after it as negative steps.
reasoning path are equally wrong, and some steps
may still be useful for reasoning. To exploit this,
we extend the voting verifier to a step-aware voting
verifier by introducing an extended loss function:
L = L0 + α · L1,
L1 =
|Dˆ|
X
i=1
|Si|
X
j=1
BCE(labeli,j , f′
(inputi
, j)).
(2)
α is a hyperparameter to balance the original
loss L0 and the step-level auxiliary loss L1;
Si,1, Si,2, ..., Si,|Si| are the steps in zi
; labeli,j indicates whether Si,j is correct or not; f
′
(inputi
, j)
represents the probability of the positive label for
Si,j .
3
To obtain the step-level labels (i.e., labeli,j ) for
negative training data with wrong answers, we design an algorithm that compares intermediate results among steps in positive/negative reasoning
paths. Figure 3 illustrates this algorithm. This
algorithm can not only work on math word problems, but also generalize to other reasoning tasks:
we use an off-the-shelf natural language inference
model, roberta-large-mnli (Liu et al., 2019), to
check whether two reasoning steps are semantically equivalent or not. Given a reasoning step, if
we cannot find any semantically equivalent step in
3
Specifically, f
′
(inputi
, j) is predicted from the hidden
state of the last token of Si,j in DEBERTA-V3-LARGE, similar
to token classification tasks.
the positive reasoning paths, we label it and all the
subsequent steps as negative steps.
3 Experimental Setup
3.1 Reasoning Tasks
Arithmetic Reasoning. Following Wang et al.
(2022c), we use AsDiv (Miao et al., 2020), SingleEq (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2015), MultiArith
(Roy and Roth, 2015), SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021),
and GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021).
Commonsense Reasoning. Following Wang
et al. (2022c), we use CommonsenseQA (Talmor
et al., 2019) and StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021).
Inductive Reasoning. We use CLUTRR (Sinha
et al., 2019), a diagnostic benchmark for inductive reasoning, requiring inferring kinship relations
between characters in short stories.
3.2 Details
Language Models. We use three OpenAI language models: davinci, text-davinci-002 and codedavinci-002. We use the default parameters except
a temperature of 0.5 in sampling.
Exemplars. For arithmetic/commonsense/inductive reasoning, each prompt contains 5/7/7 exemplars. For DIVERSE, each question has 5 different prompts, and 20 reasoning paths are sampled
from the language model for each prompt. For
arithmetic reasoning, the exemplars are randomly
sampled from the training dataset of GSM8K; for
CLUTRR, the exemplars are sampled from its training dataset, with reasoning paths synthesized by
handcraft rules (detailed settings for CLUTRR are
listed in Appendix D); for StrategyQA and CommonsenseQA, their original datasets do not contain
enough exemplars with well-annotated reasoning
paths, so we construct 1, 000 pseudo exemplars by
“self-teaching” (the approach and the noise issue are
discussed in Appendix B) from “seed” exemplars
provided by Wei et al. (2022).
Training Datasets. For each task, we sample
1, 000 ⟨question, answer⟩ pairs from the training
dataset to train the verifier.
Verifier. We fine-tune deberta-v3-large (He et al.,
2021) with learning rate 1 × 10−5
and batch size
128. For the step-aware verifier, we select the best
α among 0.0/0.1/0.2/0.3.


